docs: reference pages for Evaluation and Metrics definitions and providers (#1224)
keptn/lifecycle-toolkit: docs/content/en/docs/implementing/metrics.md

---
title: Keptn Metrics
description: Implement Keptn site metrics
weight: 130
---

Kubernetes provides two metrics servers,
one that is custom, the other external.
However, the Kubernetes metrics servers
only allow you to release a single service on a API;
you cannot use multiple observability platforms
in one namespace for one API.

The Keptn Metrics Operator provides a single entry point to all metrics in the cluster
and allows you to use multiple observability platforms
and, beginning with v0.8.0,
multiple instances of any observability platform.
Keptn Metrics are also application aware

> so they report data for all workflows that are included in the Keptn application.

Reviewer: This sentence needs to be corrected. We don't report metrics for applications :/ A Metric can be created with a query that fetches data for a property that describes some quality of the application, but we don't do that automatically. 
Furthermore, we don't have workflows but workloads. We don't report data for them. Metrics are fetched independently. Metrics can be used for an evaluation at workload- and application-level, though.

This data can be displayed on Grafana
or another standard dashboard application that you configure
or can be retrieved using standard Kubernetes commands.

TODO: Add more introductory info

## Keptn metric basics

Keptn metrics are implemented with two CRDs:

* [KeptnMetric](../yaml-crd-ref/metric.md) --
  define the metric to report
* [KeptnMetricsProvider](../yaml-crd-ref/metricsprovider.md) --

>   define the data provider to be used for this metric

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  define the configuration for a data provider
```

## Using OpenTelemetry with Keptn metrics

Keptn metrics can be exposed as OpenTelemetry (OTel) metrics
via port `9999` of the KLT metrics-operator.

To expose OTel metrics,
be sure that the `EXPOSE_KEPTN_METRICS` environment variable
in the `metrics-operator` manifest is set to `true`,
which is the default value.

To access the metrics, use the following command:

```shell
kubectl port-forward deployment/metrics-operator 9999 -n keptn-lifecycle-toolkit-system
```

> You can access the metrics from your browser at:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can access the metrics from your browser at: `http://localhost:9999`
```

## Accessing Metrics via the Kubernetes Custom Metrics API

`KeptnMetrics` can also be retrieved via the Kubernetes Custom Metrics API.

### Using the HorizontalPodAutoscaler

Use the Kubernetes Custom Metrics API
to refer to `KeptnMetric` via the
[Kubernetes HorizontalPodAutoscaler](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/run-application/horizontal-pod-autoscale/)
(HPA),
as in the following example:

```yaml
apiVersion: autoscaling/v2
kind: HorizontalPodAutoscaler
metadata:
  name: podtato-head-entry
  namespace: podtato-kubectl
spec:
  scaleTargetRef:
    apiVersion: apps/v1
    kind: Deployment
    name: podtato-head-entry
  minReplicas: 1
  maxReplicas: 10
  metrics:
    - type: Object
      object:
        metric:
          name: keptnmetric-sample
        describedObject:
          apiVersion: metrics.keptn.sh/v1alpha1
          kind: KeptnMetric
          name: keptnmetric-sample
        target:
          type: Value
          value: "10"
```

See the [Scaling Kubernetes Workloads based on Dynatrace Metrics](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/scaling-kubernetes-workloads-based-dynatrace-metrics-keptnproject/)
blog post
for a detailed discussion of doing this with Dynatrace metrics.

> A similar approach could be used to implement HPA with other data providers.

Reviewer: I would change the sentence like this:
```suggestion
The same approach could be used to implement HPA with other data providers.
```
Here, we don't define the provider in the HPA configuration, hence the approach is the same if we are using prometheus. The thing that changes for using a different provider is the definition of the `KeptnMetric` which is not shown in this section.

This data can be displayed on Grafana
or another standard dashboard application that you configure
or can be retrieved using standard Kubernetes commands.

TODO: Add more introductory info

## Keptn metrics basics

Keptn metrics are implemented with two CRDs:

* [KeptnMetric](../yaml-crd-ref/metric.md) --
  define the metric to report
* [KeptnMetricsProvider](../yaml-crd-ref/metricsprovider.md) --
  define the data provider to be used for this metric

## Using OpenTelemetry with Keptn metrics

Keptn metrics can be exposed as OpenTelemetry (OTel) metrics
via port `9999` of the KLT metrics-operator.

To expose OTel metrics,
be sure that the `EXPOSE_KEPTN_METRICS` environment variable
in the `metrics-operator` manifest is set to `true`,
which is the default value.

To access the metrics, use the following command:

```shell
kubectl port-forward deployment/metrics-operator 9999 -n keptn-lifecycle-toolkit-system
```

You can access the metrics from your browser at:

## Accessing Metrics via the Kubernetes Custom Metrics API

`KeptnMetrics` can also be retrieved via the Kubernetes Custom Metrics API.

### Using the HorizontalPodAutoscaler

Use the Kubernetes Custom Metrics API

> to refer to Keptnmetrics via the

Author: ```suggestion
to refer to `KeptnMetric` via the
```

---
title: Keptn Metrics
description: Implement Keptn site metrics
weight: 130
---

Kubernetes provides two metrics servers,
one that is custom, the other external.
However, the Kubernetes metrics servers
only allow you to release a single service on a API;
you cannot use multiple observability platforms

> in one namespace for one API.

Author: Oh dear!  I think these are Giovanni's words but perhaps I messed them up.  The intent is to explain why KLT has its own metrics implementation rather than using the Kubernetes metrics

> in one namespace for one API.

Author: So are you saying no mention of the k8s metrics servers?  I left in the initial sentence for now -- it seems that we need to at least mention the k8s metrics servers or people are going to wonder...  But maybe different content.

What if we lead off with the "The Keptn metric server..." sentence and then say that it is an overlay to the k8s metric servers?  Is that accurate?

The Keptn Metrics Operator provides a single entry point to all metrics in the cluster
and allows you to use multiple observability platforms
and, beginning with v0.8.0,
multiple instances of any observability platform.
Keptn Metrics are also application aware

> so report data for all workflows that are included in the Keptn application.

Author: ```suggestion
so they report data for all workflows that are included in the Keptn application.
```
Does this sound better?  What was there was actually a complete sentence but perhaps this is clearer.

This data can be displayed on Grafana
or another standard dashboard application that you configure
or can be retrieved using standard Kubernetes commands.

[More introductory info to come]

## Keptn metrics basics

Keptn metrics are implemented with two CRDs:

* [KeptnMetric](../yaml-crd-ref/metric.md) --
  define the metric to report
* [KeptnMetricsProvider](../yaml-crd-ref/metricsprovider.md) --
  define the data provider to be used for this metric

## Using OpenTelemetry with Keptn metrics

Keptn metrics can be exposed as OpenTelemetry (OTel) metrics
via port `9999` of the KLT metrics-operator.

To expose OTel metrics,
be sure that the `EXPOSE_KEPTN_METRICS` environment variable
in the `metrics-operator` manifest is set to `true`,
which is the default value.

To access the metrics, use the following command:

```shell
kubectl port-forward deployment/metrics-operator 9999 -n keptn-lifecycle-toolkit-system
```

You can access the metrics from your browser at:

```http://localhost:9999/metrics```

## Accessing Metrics via the Kubernetes Custom Metrics API

> `KeptnMetrics` can also be retrieved via the Kubernetes Custom Metrics API.

Author: Okay, I was thinking that "Keptn Metrics" or "Keptn metrics" referred to the feature whereas KeptnMetric refers to the actual CR.  Yeah, we need some standards here but...

So, for example, should the headers be "KeptnMetric basics", "Using OpenTelemetry with KeptnMetric", etc?
